---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome"
date:   2015-02-06
categories: misc
---
This post starts a new series of software engineering topics and practices I
want to share with the community. As a software consultant running my own
business, I am confronted with lot of topics around software engineering and
agile project management. Before starting my first technical post, I want to
write a small summary of my professional career.

I studied computer science at the JKU in Linz, Austria and finished my master
degree (Dipl.-Ing.) in 2001. After working as a software developer for one
year, I decided to start a PhD program at the Technical University of Graz. My
focus was on Virtual Reality technologies and medical imaging. After finishing
my PhD, I was project manager in a big EU project (FP7) researching ways of how
to use new technologies (i.e. Virtual and Augmented Reality technologies) for
planning urban cities.

In 2007, I suddenly got a call from Microsoft and got hired as a software team
lead. I was employed for almost 6 years and was leading a software development
team working on cutting edge products for the digital aerial survey market.
During that time I already got in touch with agile software engineering and
tried different approaches like Scrum or Kanban. Besides software development,
      I also got the chance getting trained as a manager empowering a team to
      high performance. In 2013, I finally decided to start my own business.
      Besides several software development projects for my customers, my main
      focus is on agile project management and software engineering consulting.


[reecon]: http://www.reecon.at
